CR migration blog post (#792)
mattermost/mattermost-developer-documentation: site/content/blog/2021-04-16-migrating-operator-custom-resource.md

```yaml
apiVersion: mattermost.com/v1alpha1
kind: ClusterInstallation
metadata:
  name: my-mattermost
spec:
  ...
  migrate: "true"  # New field added to ClusterInstallation. Setting it to 'true' instructs the controller to start the migration.
```

This way we can perform the migration in the following way:
- When the controller for `ClusterInstallation` sees that the `spec.migrate` is set to `true`, it stops regular reconciliation of the CR and starts the migration by converting the old resource to the new one. 
- Immediately after the `Mattermost` resource is created, the controller for `Mattermost` sees it and starts to adjust existing resources like Services and Deployments to the new CR, making small changes and overriding owner references.

> - When we are sure that the controller for `Mattermost` successfully finished its work and Mattermost Pods are ready to serve traffic, the old `ClusterInstallation` is deleted, and voila!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When we're sure that the controller for `Mattermost` has successfully finished its work and Mattermost pods are ready to serve traffic, the old `ClusterInstallation` is deleted, and voila!
```

> - As in the second phase the controller is just checking new Pods health, it can just do it once and requeue the resource for latter reconciliation while starting the migration for the next one, which gives us ability to migrate multiple resources at a time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- As in the second phase the controller is just checking new pods' health, it can just do it once and requeue the resource for latter reconciliation while starting the migration for the next one. This gives us the ability to migrate multiple resources at a time.
```

> The migration process has another advantage, that is if anything goes wrong it can be easily reverted just by setting `spec.migrate` back to `false` and removing the newly created `Mattermost` CR. The controller for `ClusterInstallation` will then claim the resources back and continue to monitor them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The migration process has another advantage: If anything goes wrong it can be easily reverted just by setting `spec.migrate` back to `false` and removing the newly created `Mattermost` CR. The controller for `ClusterInstallation` will then claim the resources back and continue to monitor them.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Dealing with immutable fields

"Exchanging" the Kubernetes resources ownership between two Custom Resources worked fine in most cases but not for all of them.

Old Mattermost Deployments created by the Operator used the following `spec.selector`:
```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
...
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: mattermost
      v1alpha1.mattermost.com/installation: my-mattermost
      v1alpha1.mattermost.com/resource: my-mattermost
...
```

> It is understandable that when we set out to migrate to version `v1beta` we wanted to get rid of `v1alpha1` from everywhere and change it as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's understandable that when we set out to migrate to version `v1beta` we wanted to get rid of `v1alpha1` from everywhere and change it as well.
```

> Kubernetes Deployments have some awesome features like [rolling updates](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tutorials/kubernetes-basics/update/update-intro/) that we use all the time when we change environment variables, versions, or other configuration of our installations. It allows for updating Pods sequentially keeping some of them running while others are being updated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kubernetes Deployments have some awesome features like [rolling updates](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tutorials/kubernetes-basics/update/update-intro/) that we use all the time when we change environment variables, versions, or other configurations of our installations. It allows for updating Pods sequentially keeping some of them running while others are being updated.
```

> Unfortunately, the `spec.selector` field is immutable so we could not just update the Deployment. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, the `spec.selector` field is immutable so we couldn't just update the Deployment.
```

> We also cannot have two Deployments of the same name in the same namespace and we did not want to change the names of resources created by the Operator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also can't have two Deployments of the same name in the same namespace and we didn't want to change the names of resources created by the Operator.

```

> Simply running the [Client Go](https://github.com/kubernetes/client-go) equivalent of `kubectl delete deployment...` and creating it from scratch was not an option either as it would cause the deletion of all Pods running Mattermost and result in a brief downtime to Mattermost instance managed by the Mattermost Operator and it would violate one of our objectives.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Simply running the [Client Go](https://github.com/kubernetes/client-go) equivalent of `kubectl delete deployment...` and creating it from scratch wasn't an option either as it would cause the deletion of all Pods running Mattermost and result in a brief downtime to Mattermost instance managed by the Mattermost Operator and it would violate one of our objectives.
```

#### Recreating Deployments without downtime

However, we can still delete the Deployment without deleting the Pods by using proper [deletion propagation policy](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/garbage-collection/#controlling-how-the-garbage-collector-deletes-dependents) and orphaning them.

> In fact, the resources we orphan are not directly Pods but rather [Replica Sets](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/replicaset/) that manage Pods on behalf of Deployment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

In fact, the resources we orphan are not directly Pods but rather [Replica Sets](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/replicaset/) that manage Pods on behalf of Deployment.
```

![Deployment-Replica-Sets-Pods](./2021-04-16-migrating-operator-custom-resource/deployment-replica-sets-pods.png)

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Although Replica Sets (RS) `spec.selector` field is also immutable and we will have to eventually delete them, Replica Sets names are not as unique as the Deployments are. They contain a random suffix attached after the Deployment name they are connected to, for example: `my-mattermost-8599f77fcb` (the suffix is also a part of Pods name suffix managed by the RS).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although Replica Sets (RS) `spec.selector` field is also immutable and we'll have to eventually delete them, Replica Sets names are not as unique as the Deployments are. They contain a random suffix attached after the Deployment name they are connected to, for example: `my-mattermost-8599f77fcb` (the suffix is also a part of Pods name suffix managed by the RS).
```

```
❯ kubectl get deployments.apps
NAME      READY   UP-TO-DATE   AVAILABLE   AGE
mm-abcd   2/2     2            2           22h

❯ kubectl get replicasets.apps
NAME                 DESIRED   CURRENT   READY   AGE
mm-abcd-6fccc4f76f   0         0         0       22h  <- Old Replica Set is scaled to 0
mm-abcd-9df98d568    2         2         2       16m

❯ kubectl get pods
NAME                      READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
mm-abcd-9df98d568-q8z6g   1/1     Running   0          16m  <- Pods share part of the suffix with the RS they belong to
mm-abcd-9df98d568-vdxjx   1/1     Running   0          16m
```

> It allows us to recreate Deployment and for a moment simultaneously have Replica Sets for both old Deployment and the new one. As a result, our installations experience no downtime whatsoever.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It allows us to recreate Deployment and for a moment simultaneously have Replica Sets for both the old Deployment and the new one. As a result, our installations experience no downtime whatsoever.
```

> There are some minor drawbacks to this approach such as that after the migration we lose previous revisions of the Deployment or at some point in time there will be twice as many Pods running for migrating Mattermost installation but none of those was a deal-breaker for us.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are some minor drawbacks to this approach such as that after the migration we lose previous revisions of the Deployment or at some point in time there will be twice as many Pods running for migrating the Mattermost installation but none of those was a deal-breaker for us.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Managing the migration

For thousands of installations running as part of Mattermost Cloud, the migration was almost fully automated and performed by [our managing service](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-cloud).

> There we already have all building blocks for managing all those Custome Resources for version updates etc. All we had to do was to add some code that would perform the update on `ClusterInstallation` resource (set `spec.migrate` to `true`) and wait for the new `Mattermost` resource to reach the `stable` state while Mattermost Operators perform their magic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There we already have all the building blocks for managing all those Custome Resources for version updates etc. All we had to do was to add some code that would perform the update on the `ClusterInstallation` resource (set `spec.migrate` to `true`) and wait for the new `Mattermost` resource to reach the `stable` state while Mattermost Operators perform their magic.
```

> For customers using Mattermost Operator directly in most cases, the migration is as easy as running [one kubectl command](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-operator/blob/master/docs/migration.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For customers using the Mattermost Operator directly in most cases, the migration is as easy as running [one kubectl command](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-operator/blob/master/docs/migration.md).
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ## Summing up

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Conclusion
```
